batch-scripting.md, before:

# Batch Scripting

## Introduction

-   Scripting for Windows Operating Systems.
-   [Guide to Windows Batch Scripting](https://steve-jansen.github.io/guides/windows-batch-scripting)
-   [Windows batch files: .bat vs .cmd?](https://stackoverflow.com/a/149918)
-   [Command prompt in Windows and Linux -- What is their language called?](https://superuser.com/questions/349481/command-prompt-in-windows-and-linux-what-is-their-language-called)
    -   Good history here

## Loops

-   [How do you loop in a Windows batch file?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1355791/how-do-you-loop-in-a-windows-batch-file)

## Switch Case

-   It is not a special construct, but is created using labels and calls.
-   [Switch statement equivalent in Windows batch file](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/18423443/switch-statement-equivalent-in-windows-batch-file)

## Functions

-   [What is the difference between CALL and GOTO?](https://stackoverflow.com/a/34402477)
-   [Where does GOTO :EOF return to?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37515901/where-does-goto-eof-return-to/37518000#37518000)

Commit message:

Add Shell cmds, & Shell & Windows scripting concepts

batch-scripting.md, after:

# Batch Scripting

## Introduction

-   Scripting for Windows Operating Systems.
-   [Guide to Windows Batch Scripting](https://steve-jansen.github.io/guides/windows-batch-scripting)
-   [Windows batch files: .bat vs .cmd?](https://stackoverflow.com/a/149918)
-   [Command prompt in Windows and Linux -- What is their language called?](https://superuser.com/questions/349481/command-prompt-in-windows-and-linux-what-is-their-language-called)
    -   Good history here

## Variables

-   [What is the difference between SETX and SET in environment variables in Windows](https://superuser.com/questions/916649/what-is-the-difference-between-setx-and-set-in-environment-variables-in-windows)

## Loops

-   [How do you loop in a Windows batch file?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1355791/how-do-you-loop-in-a-windows-batch-file)

## Switch Case

-   It is not a special construct, but is created using labels and calls.
-   [Switch statement equivalent in Windows batch file](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/18423443/switch-statement-equivalent-in-windows-batch-file)

## Functions

-   [What is the difference between CALL and GOTO?](https://stackoverflow.com/a/34402477)
-   [Where does GOTO :EOF return to?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37515901/where-does-goto-eof-return-to/37518000#37518000)
